Hi,
I'd like to welcome you to session 128,
Font Management on OS X.
The font management on Mac OS X has
changed a lot compared with Mac OS X and
the font formats we supported.
I think we're going to
have a great session today.
We have actually an extra guest,
a special guest, I should say,
from Macromedia.
We'll talk about his migration from
Mac OS X to Mac OS X and the APIs he
used to replace the whole course he
had on Mac OS X and go around the
limitations of a resource manager.
So let's stop now.
I'd like to introduce Nathan Taylor,
who's actually a software
engineer in the Type group,
who has been working on the
Font Manager for Mac OS X.
Alright, well,
thank you for the introduction, Xavier.
Well, I'd like to announce that
we've shipped Mac OS X.
We've done a lot of work here
getting it ready for you guys.
And we can't wait to see what
great applications that you
will create for this platform.
Today's agenda is an agenda
for answering questions.
We've received many
questions along the road,
and we hope to answer
a few of them today.
I'm going to start off by going
into the inner workings of
ATS and the Font Manager on OS X.
Then we will go into programming
examples and getting into the programming
interface and getting into the nuts and
bolts of the APIs that you will be using.
And finally, we'll have a real-life
example to spice things up.
In development of ATS for Mac OS X,
we had several enhancements
that we wanted to make.
First off,
we created a specialized database
for handling fonts and font data.
This obviated the need to use the
Resource Manager and as a result we
get better performance from taking
advantage of Mac OS X's kernel features.
Additionally, from this approach,
we can enhance scalability.
We can now handle many more
fonts and many more font formats.
Additionally,
now there is no longer an upper limit
to the number of fonts that can be
installed in the system except for the
RAM that a user might have installed.
In doing this,
we wanted to improve the extensibility
of the font system on Mac OS X.
and we also mentioned before we
support more font technologies
and font packaging formats.
Additionally,
we have support for plug-in font
rasterizers so we can create new font
rasterizers to support such things
as stroke-based fonts in the future.
A major design goal of this rewrite
for Mac OS X was to provide a
consistent programmer interface.
This way,
developers who want to use fonts
don't have to know the specific
details of the font formats
that they're going to be using,
and they don't need to be
wizards of the Resource Manager.
Another major feature is that we
feature non-invasive file access.
You can be assured that when
you install fonts from a CD,
those fonts will not be modified.
This graphic here shows an outline
of the ATS client hierarchy.
As you can see, ATS lies at the bottom.
It's the foundation for all
the text handling in Mac OS X.
There are different frameworks here
that you can take advantage with your
application and they will all call
into ATS to get font and font data.
One of the major questions we have
received most frequently is what
type of font formats do we support?
We support the TrueType font technologies
in various packaging formats.
We support the standard Macintosh
resource-based font suitcases that you
know from previous versions of the OS.
We also support a new format,
the D-Font format,
which is a data fork packaged font
very similar to the resource fork.
We also support now Windows TrueType
fonts so you can install
TTF and TTC fonts and they
will just work in Mac OS X.
Thank you.
Additionally, we support a wide variety
of PostScript fonts.
We now support the up and coming standard
OpenType from Microsoft and Adobe.
And we also support the
Type 1 format that you all
know from Adobe Type Manager.
Finally, we have support for Asian fonts
using the Character Identifier
keyed PostScript fonts.
Another frequently asked question is,
where should fonts be
installed in the system?
These areas in the system are listed
in precedence order here and we use the
precedence to resolve font duplicates.
We consider these areas
domains in the system.
The highest precedence
domain is the user domain.
It's in the user's home directory.
They have a library fonts folder.
Users can install any fonts
they want in this directory.
They will take precedence over other
fonts and the user will get to see
the fonts that they intend to use.
Additionally,
the next domain in the precedence
chain is the local domain.
This is where a system
administrator can install fonts
for use by all users on a system.
It is also where we encourage developers
to install application-specific
fonts and fonts they decide to
share between other applications.
Another interesting domain
is the network domain,
where a corporation can install
a corporate-specific font.
At Apple,
we install Apple Garamond TrueType
in the network domain and use
it on all corporate systems.
The fourth domain which I have
highlighted here is the System Domain.
The System Domain is where
Apple installs the system fonts.
We recommend that this domain not
be used for installing third-party
fonts or application fonts.
Finally, we also support fonts from the
standard Mac OS 9 system folder
These fonts will be picked up from
a previous install of Mac OS 9 and
used with all Mac OS X applications.
There is a caveat to this though.
The classic applications that you run
will not get to see other Mac OS X fonts.
They will only see the fonts that
are in the classic system folder.
This system folder changes when a
user changes their specific classic
folder in the Preferences panel.
and one other thing I'd like to note,
all of these domains are scanned
and activated when a user logs in.
Another area of concern is where
can developers install fonts?
We are actually very flexible.
Fonts can be installed in
almost any directory on the
system and programmatically
activated from an application.
However,
there are some recommended locations
that you install your fonts.
One place you might want to
consider if you are a vendor that
ships multiple applications that
wants to share a set of fonts,
you may want to consider making
an application library directory
inside of the local library or
a user's library to share fonts
between your various applications.
More specifically,
if you require a specific
font for your user interface,
you might want to consider installing the
font inside of your application's bundle.
This can be programmatically activated
locally only to that application and
your application will be assured that it
gets the font that it needs for its UI.
Additionally, we support activation from
memory-resident fonts and also
application from resource forks.
If you insist on bundling a fork
inside your application's resource,
you can activate that particular
file and it will activate the
font right from the resource fork.
I'd like to make one note.
Fonts that are activated programmatically
take precedence over the fonts that are
activated from the multiple domains.
And above all, the local domain,
when you activate a font programmatically
locally to your application,
you will be assured that
you will get that font.
Font installation on Mac OS X is as
simple a procedure as it was before.
It's a simple matter of locating
the font directory that you
want to install the font,
dragging the fonts you want installed,
and dropping them in that folder.
Deactivation works very similarly.
Just take them out.
These directories will get re-scanned
when you launch your application.
Also, they get scanned when a
user logs into a system.
One caveat to this is that running
applications will not see an
update of the directories until
another application is launched.
When this application is launched,
it triggers a re-scan of the directories.
Since we have multiple
domains for installing fonts,
there's the issue of
handling duplicate fonts.
And as I mentioned before,
we handle these based on a
precedence ordering of the domains.
The user domain takes precedence over all
the standard domains and programmatically
activated fonts will take precedence
over fonts in the standard font folders.
Conflicts are handled in a
slightly different manner.
We handle font conflicts by synthesizing
an entry in the font database.
This is to facilitate the fact,
as I mentioned before,
that we will not modify the files
and support non-invasive file access.
Font selection on Mac OS X works
just like it did before.
We have rewritten the APIs for
creating the standard font menus and
they act as clients directly to ATS.
Carbon developers using the
Carbon framework can present
their font menu in two manners.
You get a standard,
flat font menu as users
are used to for Mac OS 9,
and then there is a new, more compact,
hierarchical format font menu.
If you are writing a Cocoa application,
you get the benefit of
the new AppKit font panel.
This font panel makes it easy to
access your fonts in large collections,
manage your collections,
and also gives the user an easy
way to visualize the font family,
style,
and size that they are currently using.
The printing system on
Mac OS X is a major client of ATS.
It uses ATS to convert fonts
from the standard display
format to formats appropriate
for embedding in PDF documents
or downloading to a printer.
The printing is handled through
a standard dialog in all
Carbon and Cocoa applications
and uses a PDF as an intermediary
throughout the entire process.
Fonts are streamed from ATS and
embedded in this PDF file.
And we also do sub-setting
of the fonts for this.
Because the fonts are embedded,
these PDF files can be shared
between platforms and viewed
with a standard PDF viewer and
expected to display as they should.
Okay, I'd like to take a moment to
discuss what I'll be showing
in a brief demonstration here.
I will illustrate the standard
font directories on Mac OS X.
Then I will illustrate the
methods for selecting fonts,
printing and printing to
PDF and exchange of PDFs.
And finally,
an application I have that does a
local activation of a specific font.
Okay, first off, I'd like to show you,
this is the classic
So this is the classic domain where
classic system fonts are from.
You can see it's coming from the
standard Mac OS 9 system folder
that's installed on the system.
Additionally here,
this is the system domain where you can
see where we have our system fonts that
are stored as D fonts and OTF fonts.
Additionally,
I have the local domain here
where system administrators will
install system-wide fonts for
use by all the users of a system.
and finally,
users have their own font folder inside
the user home directory where they
can install any fonts they choose.
Font installation, as I mentioned,
is a simple process.
I have here a collection of
multiple formats of fonts.
And I'll install some OTF fonts here,
some PostScript character
identifier keyed fonts.
Standard PostScript Type 1 fonts
and finally a Windows Troop
type font in TTF format.
Sorry,
the command key on the left is broken on
this keyboard and I keep forgetting it.
OK.
As I mentioned,
I just installed the fonts here
and you can see that they are not
actually activated inside of this menu.
If I launch a new
application as I'm doing now,
these fonts will be activated.
The directory will be re-scanned and
you can see an example right here.
I have Arial in the TTF format,
the Windows format I just installed,
and it's a simple matter to use it.
I can select my text and change to it.
Now I have two demo apps here.
This one first shows the standard flat
Flat Style Font Menu in Carbon and then
I have a new one that I have implemented
with a Hierarchical Style Menu
And then, as I said before,
Cocoa applications get the benefit
of the new font panel where
it's easy to see the family,
typeface, and size and change this
to a font I activated.
We'll go with Tekton Pro, Oblique.
Now, as I mentioned,
printing is a simple process
presented in a standard dialog.
I can choose to print.
and preview this directly,
which will generate a PDF.
The fonts are streamed to it, subsetted,
and embedded in the PDF document.
This document now is
savable as a PDF document.
Save it to the desktop, whatever.
And then I have one I previously created,
which can be shared cross-platform
in this example with classic
using Acrobat Reader 4.
Finally, as I mentioned,
I wanted to show an example
of locally activated fonts.
This version of--
of Simple Text with the
hierarchical menus has a copy of
Apple Garamond TrueType embedded
in the applications bundle.
I call centered APIs to
locate this and activate it.
It's activated locally only
to this application and is not
available to other applications.
As you see,
if I go to this other simple text here,
there is no Apple Garamond.
There's an Apple Chancery that
came from the classic domain.
And additionally,
TextEdit doesn't have it either.
That concludes the demonstration.
I'd like to introduce Julio González,
a senior software engineer
in the type group.
He will go into the programming
interfaces of ATS and
Font Manager on Mac OS X.
Thank you, Nathan.
I'll be talking today about basically
the APIs that are available to
you for font management and some
of the issues related to OS X.
I'll start with the API sets,
some concepts, tasks,
especially from the point of view or
from the angle of all the questions we've
received as people have been bringing
up their applications to run OS X.
And finally,
I will touch up on some of the
performance issues that might bite you,
especially if you're
coming from Mac OS 9.
Before I get into everything,
while I was writing up this presentation,
I just decided,
let me take a look at what
font management used to be.
And I opened up inside Mac, Volume 1,
and that's what I came up with.
There were seven simple APIs.
Boy, do I miss those days.
A lot less work,
but we've come a long way,
especially with 10.
So, let's get into it now.
One of the issues or things
that presented some confusion as
we introduced Mac OS X is that
there are two set of APIs that
you can use for font management.
The first one being the Font Management,
the extended Font Management set
of APIs that are present on 9.
They're also available to you
or we export it by CarbonLib and
also of course available in 10.
But then there's a new set of
APIs that some of you have seen
that are part of the ATS framework.
It's the header is ATSfont.h.
And I want to make mention of this.
This is a new set of APIs that
we've created and are only
available under Mac OS X.
We have no plans at this point to take
that back to CarbonLib or Mac OS 9.
The intent of this API was to fill
in some of the gaps that were created
as we moved to Mac OS X and try to
address some of the system differences.
Moreover, there are opportunities here in
this new set of APIs to address some
features that we can no longer address
under the Font Management set of APIs.
So once again,
this is only available on Mac OS X.
So, let's get started with some
of the programming concepts.
First one being the
font family reference.
Hopefully most of you are aware of that.
It's basically an opaque reference
to a collection of fonts that share
the same design characteristics.
Then there are font references.
Basically these are opaque
references to specific strike or
specific font in that font family.
Then there are containers.
Containers are opaque references to
where the data for the font resides.
This could get a little ambiguous
as we now support different
file formats for the fonts.
So where does the data really live?
We like to keep that as much of it hidden
from you as to prevent some confusion.
This is something, for example,
that we'll try to address
in the new set of APIs.
Finally,
there's the concept of generation.
As we moved away in Mac OS X from
using the Resource Manager to
keep track of all our font data,
we created our own font database.
In fact, this is also present in 9.
So, in order to keep track of when
the data change or when fonts
were added or got deleted,
we have a generation,
a generation seed that
we can keep track of.
And there are APIs where
you can get the seed.
So this is how you can tell when
something has changed in the database.
So, yes, we know you still have to pull.
Notification hopefully
will be on the way.
Okay, the next one is the data types.
This has definitely caused some
grief for some of the developers
out there and we'd like to take
some time now to clarify this.
Basically,
you have data types for specifying font
references and font family references.
And for the font references,
we have the FM font and the
ATSU font ID and the ATS font ref.
FM Font and ATSU Font ID are
basically the same thing and
can be used interchangeably.
However, ATS font refs are not the same,
even though at this moment they are
the same and you can get away with it,
but they are not intended
to be the same thing.
If you use them interchangeably,
you will surely run into trouble.
Same thing goes for the FNFont
family and ATSFontFamilyRef.
Here it's a little bit more
obvious as the FNFontFamily is
the usual signed 16-bit number,
basically the resource ID,
whereas the ATSFontFamilyRef
is an opaque 32-bit data type.
Once again,
they cannot be used interchangeably.
So next we'll move into some of the
programming tasks that I'd like to cover.
And again,
these are tasks where people have
been having troubles or questions
as they've come up to OS X.
Storing font references,
data access especially, enumeration,
that is how to find out what
fonts are installed in the system,
conversion compatibility,
how to go about activating
fonts and deactivating them,
and finally how to go about
selecting the fonts through the UI.
Storing font references.
We get asked this
question year after year.
What is Apple's recommendation
to store font references?
Well, we're still at the same stage.
We have no strong recommendation
on what to do about it,
but let's examine what people have done
in the past and some of the caveats here.
Some applications have gone in and stored
the font family ID as a font reference.
That worked mostly fine on 9S
confined to one particular system.
But on 10, that could break even quicker.
Reason being, as Nathan mentioned before,
we no longer modify font files as we
install the fonts into the system.
As we used to do in 9,
if we found that there was
a resource ID conflict,
we would go ahead and modify the font
or the suitcase before it got placed in.
On 10, we no longer modify the files
and what we do is we do create
a synthetic resource ID entry,
if you will, a font family entry.
So depending on what fonts you
install or you install new fonts,
this ID is no longer guaranteed.
So it's a really,
really bad idea to store a
font family ID as a reference.
So you can still do it if it's applicable
or enough for your application,
store the font name as a reference.
But better suggestions, for example,
the Quartz engine stores
PostScript's names.
At SUI, or sorry, not at SUI, but MLTE,
it stores a combination of font names.
You can get creative and pick
up a different set of names,
store them all, and then as you open
the document later on,
try to match on the font name.
However,
as far as the API sets that we provide,
the best way still to
store a font reference,
if you want to be guaranteed of the
font that you stored as the same
font that you're going to be using,
is to use a font sync reference.
Okay, next point is data access.
Let's examine what we do typically
online regarding font data access.
Typically we use heavily
the resource manager to get
at the data that we needed.
With 10,
we moved completely away from relying
on the Resource Manager to get our data.
So this is a big issue now.
The same goes with low memory globals.
On 9, they were truly globals.
On 10, they were per application,
per context.
Not that you care that much.
But there are some caveats
about low memory globals.
As we stepped away from using the
Resource Manager to keep our data,
Some of the low memory globals
that we have store data references
which were resource handles.
So if you were to access those
low memory globals and expect
to see a resource handle there,
you'll be up for a surprise.
Whenever possible,
we store nulls in there to sort
of warn you that this reference
is no longer applicable.
Another thing was that on 9,
any font file or any access
to a font that you had,
you were guaranteed that
the font file was open.
Not so in 10.
Even though through enumeration
you can get at the font,
the font file might not be open.
So,
what is the recommended way for you to
move on and get at the data on the font?
It's to use some of the accesses
that we've provided in the
font management set of APIs.
For example, the FMGit Font Table,
FMGit Font Table Directory,
FMGit Font Container,
and there are others.
Here's a preview of some of the data
accesses that APIs that we provide
in the ATS font set of APIs that
might be useful to you at this stage.
For example,
the ATS font Git Postscript Name,
which will return to you the postscript
name and you don't have to go dig it
from the font or anything like that.
And given the right options,
it will also return to you the CID name.
Also, there's the ATS font Git Horizontal
Metrics and Git Vertical Metrics,
which will return to you some
metrics information that you might
have otherwise gathered from the
width tables or FM Swap Font.
So, now,
what if we don't have the APIs right
now to get at the data that you want?
For example, one typical request that
we got from developers was,
"How do I get at the font?
I still need to get access to the font
and process the data in my own way." So,
this is something that we'll have,
hopefully, later in the future in
the ATS font set of APIs,
but you can do that with the set
of APIs that we have right now.
First, presumably,
you're going to be starting from
a font family reference and also,
hopefully, a Quick Draw style or weight.
So, from there,
you can call fmgit font from font family
instance and get a font reference.
Given the font reference,
you can call fmgit font container,
which will give you the FS spec.
And next,
you've got to call open resource fork.
Again, you've got to call it because
the file might not be open.
It's not guaranteed to be open.
That in itself might fail
because it might be a defont,
so you'll need to call the
appropriate Carbon calls to open
the data fork resource font.
Once you do that, you can get the font
family name and from there,
call get one name resource
to get at the font.
Notice I used the name.
We did not use the font family
ID to get at the resource.
Reason being, the font family ID might
be a synthetic font family,
so you're not going to be able
to get at the resource that way.
get at the resource that way.
So please use the name.
Okay, the next question is,
how do I find out what fonts
are installed in the system?
Before it was very simple,
you could enumerate through
the Resource Manager and
it'll give you all the fonts.
Not so under 10.
So there's a couple of iterator
APIs that are available to you,
both on the font, FM font set of APIs and
the ATS font set of APIs.
With this,
there is an issue that developers
had in reading the documentation
that is up on the web.
Basically, the documentation stated that
neither one of these iterators
would return to you all the fonts
that are installed in the system.
That is mostly true and
it's a little bit confusing.
Where that statement
comes from is that on 9,
you can't get all the fonts installed
in the system simply because on 9,
we do not support data fork fonts.
And our conflict resolution
and duplicate resolution is
not as strong as it is on 10.
However, on 10,
you can get all the fonts that
are installed in the system.
If you call a font reference iterator,
you get all the outline fonts only.
You will not get any of the bitmap fonts.
Basically,
because if you try to use a font
reference in a bitmap font in some
of the APIs that we have there,
you basically get an error.
There's no sense in getting a
table for a bitmap-only font,
for example.
However,
using the font family iterators along
with the font family instance iterators,
you'll be able to get at every
single font and font strike
that is installed on the system.
Whether it's a data fork font,
a bitmap font, an outline font, whatever.
You'll be able to get at every single
one of the fonts that are installed.
One nice thing about these
iterators is the filters.
There's some set of
filters that you can use.
We provide some standard ones
such as the technology filter.
And you can tell it,
"Please give me all the True Tribe fonts
or all the Type 1 fonts that are
installed." The container filter,
so given a container reference that
you might have obtained elsewhere,
give me all the fonts or font families
that belong to this container.
Generation,
which you might find useful if you're
keeping track of the generation to
let you know what fonts got installed,
just got installed on the system.
And also we provide you with some
callbacks that you can use to
filter the fonts as you go along.
So here's some example on how to get
every single one of the strikes on 10.
You basically first call
fmcreate font family iterator,
which will return an
iterator cookie to you.
You use this cookie to
call fmgetnext font family,
and it just basically gives you
every font family from that point on.
Once you have the font family,
you can create a font
family instance iterator.
This iterator will return to
you each one of the weights
that are part of this family,
along with any duplicates
that we might have resolved.
So you'll get every single
font that got installed.
At the end,
you just dispose the iterators.
One thing to note that in the while loop,
we check for the errors here.
One of the errors that you
might get as a valid error is
that the iteration is done.
But another interesting error
that you can get is that the
font object database has changed.
So as you're iterating,
you can get note of this error and decide
whether you want to make sure that the
database has changed and just proceed.
Or you can reset.
There's a reset call that you
can call and reset the iterator
and start all over again.
Conversion APIs.
At the moment,
we only have conversion APIs that
can take you all within the
FN Font Management set of
APIs from a font reference
to a font family reference,
a font family instance reference.
There is no way at this
point in time to go from
An FN font ref to an ATS font ref
and the same goes for the ATS font
family ref and FN font family ref.
That will be forthcoming.
Compatibility,
we have that in the layer of the
ATS font and it's basically a meager
attempt actually to just get some
compatibility with the Quick Draw space.
And there will be more in this
arena too as we try to make it
easier for you to transition from
the FM font management set of APIs,
which is for the moment the
recommended way to do things,
to the ATS font set of APIs,
which will be in the future the
right way to carry on if you're
developing exclusively for OS X.
Another interesting API here is the
ATS font get file specification,
which has sort of a counterpart
on the FM side of things.
I think it's FM get font container.
The ATS font get file specification
takes a font reference and in
general font references are
references to outline data.
So this will get you directly to
the outline data as opposed to say
in an LWFN font it won't point back
to you at where the suitcase is.
Thank you.
Okay,
now how do I go about programmatically
activating and deactivating fonts?
Some of these APIs have
been available in 9,
the FM Activate Fonts
and FM Deactivate Fonts.
You can activate a single file
or a whole directory of files.
Please note that if you pass in
a directory to get activated,
we only activate the files
that are in that space,
in that directory.
We don't go and recursively activate
all the fonts in the directories.
In the ATS font side of things,
there's a couple of nice ways to
activate and deactivate font files.
And it has a nice feature,
the ATS font activate from
file specification that
you can specify a context.
So you can,
like Nathan showed in his demo,
if you make this call,
you can specify a local context so
that that font is only visible to
that running process or application.
Lastly, there's the ATS font
activate from memory,
which given a stream and if you
give us some hints about the stream,
we can activate the font for you.
This is heavily used by the Quartz
engine to render embedded PDF fonts.
So here's the demo and this is
basically some source code for
what Nathan showed in his demo.
Say you were an application,
a 9 application that is quickly coming
up to 10 and you still have your
fonts as part of your resource fork.
Well, in 9,
as the resource fork for the application
opened up as the application launched,
the font immediately became part of the
resource chain and it became available or
visible for the Font Manager and actually
to all applications that were running.
In Tencent, we no longer rely on
the Resource Manager.
If you wish for the font to be activated,
you must programmatically do so.
One way to do this is you call the
Process Manager APIs and whatever else
to get at what is the file spec for
the currently running application,
your application.
Once you have the FS spec,
you can call this API,
ATS Font Activate from
File Specification.
Pass that off the application file spec.
You can specify the context.
If you for some reason
wanted it to be global,
you can specify that there,
but preferably or most of
the time it will be local.
And it will return to you an
opaque container reference.
Lastly, if you care to do so,
you can find what fonts are part
of this container by calling
ATS Find Font from Container.
No, the preferred way actually to,
as Nathan said,
to ship fonts for your application
would be to just place a directory
full of fonts in your application
bundle instead of just having it
be part of your resource work.
It's just a little cleaner.
Now, selection.
This is another question that
we've been getting from our
developers on the Carbon side,
is how do you go about selecting fonts?
So, the answer is, as Nathan showed,
at least from the Carbon side of things,
is that you have to still use and
depend on the Carbon set of APIs,
which means that you don't have access
to the font panel that Cocoa has for you.
That will be forthcoming too,
and it's a high priority.
So how do you go about having
a font menu intent since we no
longer use a Resource Manager?
Well, you can still call a pen rest menu
and it will do the right thing.
It will create the standard flat
font menu that you all know.
But it basically ends up calling create
standard font menu to do its job.
And there are a couple of new
APIs that go along with this that
I'll talk to you about in a minute.
So here's the
Create Standard Font menu call.
Basically you get your menu handle.
And as Nathan showed in his demo,
you have two options.
Excuse me.
You can create a flat representation
of the font or a hierarchical,
more compact representation of the font,
which basically takes a font
family and then appends a submenu
with all the criteria styles
that are associated with it.
So here in the call, it's very simple.
In this one,
you specify the hierarchical font menu,
and it returns to you a hierarchical font
menu count cookie that you'll need later.
So, what happens when the user
clicks on the font menu?
So, if you had just your plain
old flat space font menu,
you called menu select and get the
menu item and the name and then
from there go to the font family.
A better way to do this,
which takes advantage of
some of the features of TEN,
is to, before you call menu select,
you call update standard font menu.
What this does for you,
if you created the font using the
create API that I just showed you,
is that it will keep track
of the generation for you.
So, if you call this call
before the menu select,
it will find out if the database,
the font object database
has changed and if so,
it will recreate the font menu and
Nathan showed that in his demo.
So once you have that,
once you call menu select,
you get the menu ID and from
there you can call get font
family from menu selection,
which in the flat menu space will
just return to you the font family.
But in the case of the hierarchical menu,
it will also give you the
style that the user picked.
Lastly, I want to talk a little
bit about performance,
some of the issues that you
might or might not be aware of
as you start developing for Tent.
The history here is that we moved to 10.
The major issue was that we don't have
the single memory space that we had on 9.
So font data is quite extensive and
we had to come up with a way to share
this data across all the ATS clients.
So we ended up having a server.
What this means to the client is
that some of the APIs you call end
up sending messages to the server,
whereas before on 9
there was no such thing,
it was quite fast.
So it is something that you might need
to pay attention to if you start to
see that some things that were faster,
seem faster on 9 and not so on 10.
You can start using some of the
tools available on 10 such as
Stop or Sample to find out what
the activity is to the ATS server.
Another area of concern
is font file on the OS X.
On Mac OS X, every single font file that
was available to you was open,
basically.
On X,
we can't afford to do that since every
process lives in its own little world,
so we manage this.
So, through font file iteration,
it is possible that you will iterate
through every single font file.
Say if you wanted to
create your standard,
sorry, not your standard, but you know,
a special font menu, some nifty font menu
that we do not provide,
and you want to iterate through
all the fonts in the system.
Well,
this will cost messaging to the server.
Along with that,
it will cost some of the file
caches that we have to get thrashed,
which is perfectly fine if
we do not provide what you
need in the APIs that we have.
However,
what you need to keep in mind is that
you might want to cache this information
to avoid this sort of iteration.
Another way is the usage
of the APIs we provide.
For example,
the activation set of APIs allows you
to activate a font file or a directory.
So, it's far more efficient to activate a
directory than if you had some old code
that had just activated a file at a time,
because that will create
multiple messages to the server.
So, one final note is,
please use the APIs that we've provided
whenever possible and not go to the
low level and dig your own data.
The reason being is that we
have optimized the APIs for
messaging to the server,
for keeping the files open.
Moreover, we have a good set of
caches on the server,
that makes things easier for us.
So, please stick to the
APIs whenever you can.
Now, I'd like to take a moment and invite
Scott Thompson from Macromedia and he'll
give us a real-life example of what he
had to do to bring up this app under 10,
especially to do with font management.
Hope you don't mind my cheat sheet here.
Let's see if I can figure
out how this magic works.
Okay, great.
So, my name is Scott Thompson.
I'm a senior software alchemist
and the Macintosh technical
lead for Macromedia Freehand.
We just recently shipped Freehand 10.
They showed a demo of it in the keynote.
I hope you all enjoyed that.
What I want to do is I want to start
by telling you a little bit about
what Freehand's text needs are,
and in particular some of the
font things that we have to do.
Then I'm going to talk a little bit about
the sort of things that we had to do
to adopt to the new Font Manager under
CarbonLib and Mac OS X.
Freehand 10 as a shipping application
is a CFM Carbon application.
It uses Quick Draw to do its drawing,
despite what you may have seen in
some of the reviews of Freehand.
We don't do Quartz yet.
We began carbonizing Freehand in
July of the year 2000 in earnest.
We just finished shipping in May.
So, just to give you an idea
of how long it went.
When we decided to implement
the Carbon feature,
we implemented it as a feature,
we set out a big schedule
at the very beginning.
We knew that two areas that we
were going to have to do a lot of
work on were fonts and printing.
So, we put those at the very
beginning of the schedule,
thinking that if they ran long,
we could kind of hop out.
Since printing depended on fonts,
it turns out that font manager
support turned out to be item
number one on our Carbon schedule.
Having gone through it,
fonts was also the
biggest thing that we did.
It is a very important thing.
It consumed the most of my time anyway.
Part of that was because
it was very complicated.
Freehand's usage of fonts
was very complicated.
Part of that was because
I know a lot more about fonts
now than I did when I began.
What we see on this slide is
a little bit about the text
handling capabilities of Freehand,
just to give you an idea of what we have.
I call it a mid-range text
handling capabilities.
We don't do any real
super-duper advanced typography.
But we do a little bit more
than your average text editor.
We do multi-column text.
We do justification of text, fill,
justifying, left, justifying,
all that good stuff.
We allow the user to do custom
kerning and tracking of the text.
We do text on a path, text in a path,
text flowing around a path,
meaning that you have an object in there
and the text goes on the outside of it.
And we do postscript output.
So where do we begin?
Well, the first thing that I started
with was the font menu.
Our font menu was being created by, uh,
append res menu and all that good stuff.
One of our big goals for Freehand was
to sort of get away from the idea that
all fonts had to have a resource fork,
in particular a font, because, you know,
one of the really nice features that
you can do on Mac OS X that a lot
of our customers are really excited
about is you grab your Windows font,
drag it over to the Mac OS X machine,
drop it in there, it shows up, it works,
it's really great.
So a lot of our code was
geared at understanding that
fonts always had a font,
always had resources,
and we had to get away from that.
Um, so in that vein,
the first thing we did
was create the font menu.
It was being done
through append res menu.
Uh, we had to change that to use
create standard font menu.
Uh,
we ran into one little interesting thing.
In that Freehand is a
quick draw application,
uh,
when we created the hierarchical menu,
using the hierarchical option, uh,
we found out that it was adding a lot
of fonts that are available to at SUI,
but are not necessarily
available through QuickTime.
So that's something you
want to keep in mind.
If you want to have the hierarchical
menu inside your quick draw application,
you can do it,
but you're going to have to
do it in a different way.
So, we're going to do that.
But you're going to have to
use the font iterators to,
uh, to create your own menu and
all the other good stuff.
Um,
Oh my dear, what did I write?
So in the vein of getting rid of fonts
or getting our reliance on fonts done,
we had one interesting challenge
and the biggest challenge turned
out being that we wanted Freehand 10
to continue to support Mac OS 8.6.
Mac OS 8.6 doesn't have all the
nice font manager routines that you
have under Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
So we had to do a little
bit of abstraction,
a little bit of keeping the old code
around so they could still parse
the fonts and that sort of thing.
In the end,
it turned out that that wasn't such
a bad idea because we found some
pitfalls along the way with using the
font manager routines where there were
differences between the information
that we got back from the font manager
routines and the information that
you would pull out of the fonts.
Some of those things have been taken care
of because we reported them as bugs and
the Apple engineers fixed them for us.
So hopefully, you'll never have to see
those sorts of things.
So this slide talks a little bit
about the kinds of things that
we used to get out of the font.
We used to get font names.
In particular, we were interested in the
PostScript font name because Freehand
downloads PostScript to the printer.
We deal a lot with PostScript names.
In terms of saving our font IDs,
that's what we save usually
is the PostScript font name.
We would get glyph widths
and other glyph metrics.
Some of those things, I had no idea what
they were but by golly,
I learned.
We had to get the glyph
re-encoding tables.
If you're downloading
fonts to the printer,
you have to know how the
fonts can be re-encoded,
the Mac encodings and all
that other good stuff.
We got things like kerning pair
information and other such things.
We were able to find substitutes
for all of these things in
the new font manager APIs.
For 8.6, of course,
we just continued using fonts
and didn't have a problem.
Under Mac OS 9, we tended to lean more
towards the FM Font Manager,
the calls that begin with FM,
and we used some of the
ATSU font manager routines.
And then on Mac OS X,
there are actually two cases where
you had to drop to the ATS framework,
load the framework out from the system.
One of those was
ATS Find Font Family Resource.
You'll have to ask Julio
later whether you should use
ATS Find Font Family Resource or
whether you should actually go through
the thing that he had on the slide.
We're probably doing the wrong thing.
And then we also had another routine
that called ATS Activate Font.
Freehand has two fonts that it stores
in its resource fork and we had to
activate those fonts so we had to
load that out of the Carbon bundle,
or out of the bundle using CFBundle.
For the Postscript names,
the routines that we found particularly
helpful was ATSU Find Font Name and
ATSU Find Font Name.
The ATSU routines give you a lot of
information about how to get names out
of the font tables and they're really
handy for finding a lot of information.
For example,
I didn't know that fonts can actually
contain localized font names,
but you can get those
using ATSU Find Font Name.
I want to warn you a little bit about
the routine ATSU Find Font From Name.
We used
ATSU Find Font From Name initially in
our first pass to find fonts based on
their postscript name all the time.
That turned out to be a little bit of
a mistake because that routine doesn't
perform really well on Mac OS 9.
I'm led to understand that the
caching schemes on Mac OS 9 and
Mac OS X are very different and so as
a result it performs fine on Mac OS X,
but under Mac OS 9 you can get poor
performance out of the routine.
What we ended up doing was continuing
to rely on the font information,
trying to find the font
by parsing the font first,
and if that doesn't work then we
go to ATSU Find Font From Name.
That worked out really well.
Glyph widths and other glyph metrics,
I found replacements for
those in a lot of the updated
Quick Draw font measuring routines.
Sounds really odd.
You have to remember freehand
is a really old application.
A lot of the stuff that we did during our
carbonization was actually modernization,
bring us up to the new brave new world.
And so we were relying on some stuff from
the font that could actually be gotten
from Quick Draw routines from then on.
Glyph re-encoding tables,
I believe we get those
from the font as well.
If there's not a font,
then we just let the printer driver
handle it and go on with our lives.
Currenting pair information also,
I believe, comes from the font and
if the font's not there,
we just skip it.
The other big change that we made in
Freehand was finding glyph outlines.
In Freehand you can take a bunch of text,
convert it to paths,
get the outlines of the fonts,
and then do special effects on them.
These are the four ways that Freehand 10
can actually use to get font outlines.
We have our own PostScript Type 1
font parser that's inside of Freehand.
We have our own TrueType font parser.
We also talked to the
Adobe Type Manager backend.
For those of you that are going
through Adobe Type Manager,
I don't know if Adobe's actually
released sort of a carbonized glue
code for their Adobe Type Manager,
but I was able to load some
routines from Interface Live and
actually continue to use the
Adobe Type Manager backend online.
And now we use the Atsui
low-level programming interface.
The Atsui stuff is actually really,
really nice.
It's really handy.
You pass it off a set of glyphs
that you want the outlines for,
give it a set of callbacks.
It comes back.
and iterates two things.
In closing,
I'd like to talk about one pitfall
that I ran into that you'll probably
want to start thinking about.
Number one,
you'll notice that a lot of the
higher-end text formatting options that
Freehand has can now be handled by Atsui.
So if you have the choice
between using your own font
layout engine or using Atsui,
my recommendation would be try and use
Atsui first because it's going to save
us a whole lot of trouble in the future,
I think.
Another one that I would
encourage anyone that's writing
an application that uses fonts,
go ahead and call the folks at
Adobe and buy some OpenType fonts
and start testing with them now.
OpenType fonts don't have resource forks.
They have special things.
They don't tend to go through
TrueType parsers the way you might
think because sometimes the found
outlines aren't TrueType outlines.
They're CFF or
PostScript Type 1 outlines.
And Freehand was a challenge.
It was a lot of fun and I hope that the
information I provided has been useful.
Okay.
Okay?
Thank you.
Thank you Scott, that was great.
Just to wrap it up in summary,
Scott basically summarized
it all for us here.
As you go on and bring
your applications up to 10,
the first thing to do is remove as
much Resource Manager dependencies
as you have in your application.
Please try to remember just
like Scott did in his app,
not all fonts that are going
to be present are going
to have a font in there.
They're not going to even
have a resource fork in them.
So try to move as much away from
using the Resource Manager to
get your data as possible.
And we'll be giving you some help
with that in the future also.
Then, as far as the API sets
that I talked about,
the same as Scott did,
the FM set of APIs are available
to you under 9 and Carbon Live.
Whereas the ATS font set of
APIs are just available for 10 and
it's basically work in progress.
That's where we want to be in the future,
but we're not quite there yet.
So concentrate on using the FM font
set of APIs and we're pretty certain
that you can get most of what you need.
In some cases,
you might have to dip down and
go to the ATS font API set,
but hopefully that won't
have to be too much.
So here are some sessions that
have gone on that are related to,
somewhat related to font management.
There was the text session yesterday.
I don't know if all of
you were able to attend,
but you can find that session
on video and you will,
especially you will,
the references that Scott made to Atsui,
the Atsui set of APIs,
they were talked about in this session,
so you might find that useful.
Coming up,
there's the Using Cocoa session,
and you can learn how text and
fonts are handled by Cocoa.
And later today on at 5,
there's the International Feedback Forum,
in which you can also ask us some
questions that you might have,
that we might not have time
to answer here later on.
So here's some pointers for
you regarding documentation.
There is, up on the website right now,
the Font Manager technical
documentation that you see there.
It covers the FM font set of APIs,
the Extended
Quick Draw Text Font Manager APIs.
However, there is no documentation to the
ATS font set of APIs at the moment.
Again, it's a work in progress and
as soon as we complete it,
there will be some documentation
that goes along with it.
If you're interested in storing pretty
good font references in your documents,
I recommend that you read the
Font Sync technical documentation
that is also there on the website.
Finally,
I want to make mention of something
that is not on this slide,
which is there's a tech note that we're
working on and we've got almost complete,
which covers most of what
I've talked about here today,
but in far more detail.
So please look for it on the website
where all the technical notes are issued.
be forthcoming.
I don't expect it to be much longer.
Finally, if something comes up tomorrow,
day after tomorrow,
and you need to talk to us about
a feature that you want added,
some problem that you have,
some issue that we haven't
addressed properly in our APIs,
please feel free to contact Xavier Legro,
who is the Worldwide
Developer Relations contact
for our group.
he's got our ear pretty much to his
He acts pretty good and we
do pay attention to him.
He gives us a lot of good feedback.